---
title: Stocahstic Hypercube Sample
author: Tim Menzies
excerpt: Poke a little, prune a little, stretch a little
---

Let _N_ = 50 (say).

Generate  a crowd of _N_ random examples, for each, find the distance to all other points.

As you do distances, keep a track of all the distances seen so we can learn what _close_ means
(e.g. in the following, see the _cl_ variable:


```python
def poke():
  cl=Close()
  for one in crowd:
    one.neighbors=[]
  for one in crowd:
    for two in crowd:
  	  if id(one) > id(two):
        d = dist(one,two)
        cl += d
  		  one.neighbors += [(d,two)]
  	    two.neighbors += [(d,one)]
  for one in crowd:
    one.neighbors= sorted(one.neighbors)
```

Here is  the code for _Close_ used by the _cl_ tracking variable:

```python

class Close():
	tiny=0.05
	enough=20
  def __init__(i):
    i.sum, i.n = [0]*32, [0]*32
  def p(i,x):
    for j in xrange(len(i.sum)):
      mu = i.sum[j] / i.n[j]
      if x > mu:
        return i.n[j]/i.n[0]
    return i.n[-1]/i.n[0]
  def __iadd__(i,x):
    for j in xrange(len(i.sum)):
      i.sum[j] += x
      i.n[j]   += 1
      mu        = i.sum[j] / i.n[j]
      if x >= mu: return i
      if i.sum[j] < Close.enough: return i
    return i
  def close(i,x):
    return i.p(x) < Close.enough
```

Let  _crowded_ be all the items are very close to their nearest neighbor. 
Shuffle the list of crowdeds.

Let _lonelies_ be all the items who are very far from their neasrest neighbor.
Shuffle the list of lonlies.

Now it is time for _pruneStretch_ where, a random number of times we do either:

+ _Prune_: Pick the first crowded item and  fuse it with its nearest neighbor.
Add a pointer to that crowded item noting that it has been fused to the new item
(so really, before fusing, check that that _fused_ pointer is non-nil and it if isn't follow
the fused chain to the last  fused thing). If each raw item has weight one,
thenthe fused items have a weight equal to the sum of their fused weights. When fusing two
items, create a new item that os proportionally weighted to the two old items.

+ _Stretch_: Pick the first lonely and create one new item halfway to its nearest neighbor.

Now start leapfrogging. Add all points to a list of _zombies_. Then a random number of times:

+ Pick any zombie _Z_
+ Find _Y_, which is any point closish to _Z_ (note, near enough is good enough
  and during that calculation, 
  keep track of the distances in _cl_).
+ If Y is evaluated and Y.dead and close to Z then then also Z.dead. Go back to picking a new Z.
+ Otherwise, make sure we have evalauted Y,Z.
+ Ensure Y,Z are evaluated and check for dominance.
  Each undominated member of (Y,Z) will be now alive and any others will be dead.
+ If Y,Z have one alive and dead then extrapolate from dead to alive to make new point W.
  Add W to the list of zombies.

Now you have a new population. Delete all neighbor lists and fuse pointers. Go back to _poke_.
