---
title: 'What is Software Engineering?'
author: Tim Menzies
excerpt: 'SE= make and maintain good enough software, on time, on budget'
layout: default
---

This page has two aims:

+ Try to define SE in terms of what is _constant_ in the field (i.e. what was true 20 years ago and might be true in 20 years time);
+ Try to stress what is _different_ about this view of SE than views held elsewhere.

As to the second point, in the following we eschew
linear process methods that assume that the SE
construction is some simple pipeline where the
original ideas turn (eventually) into the final
product. Rather, the following endorse SE as a place
where apes perform extensive experimentation and
elaboration of their ideas.

## Definiton


SE is the 

+ _process_ of the
+ _design_,
+ _construction_ and
+ _maintenance_ of
+ _good  enough_
+ _software_,
+ given the _available resources_.

The last point means that we are always trading off between
what we want with
what we need with what we've got. _Software engineers_, therefore
are the people we look to:

+ _Make_ and
+ _justify_
+ _well-informed decisions_ 
+ about _trade-offs_
+ in software engineering.

This, in turn means that at any time, xssoftware engineering are
aware of _multiple possibilities_ and the _reasons_ why we should be doing
one, and not the others. To enable this, students of SE can:

+ _Strategy 0: STUDY!_ Build up their background knowledge about SE;
+ _Strategy 1: READ!_ Using the literature, extend that knowledge by _reading widely_ and making
  some adjudication about all that material.  
+ _Strategy 2: MINE!_: Using data science, collect and analyze project data;
+ _Strategy 3: BUILD!_: Using software construction tools, consider multiple designs (perhaps via some prototyping.

## About Design

### Humans not perfect designers:

+ [Voltaire](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltaire):
  _It is a necessary consequence of our humanity. We are all fallible, and prone to error; let us then pardon each other's follies. This is the first principle of natural right._
+ Will Rogers: _It isn't what we don't know that gives us trouble, it's what we know that ain't so._
+ Wikipedia, long, long list of cognitive biases. e.g.
  [inattentional blindness](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vJG698U2Mvo)
  from [Simons and Chabris](http://goo.gl/bgHzrn)

### Bad Design has economic consequences:

+ Barry Boehm: [Software Engineering Economics](http://goo.gl/Mcnb5l).
  Cost of coping and working around
  earlier bad design decisions grows dramatically, the longer
  those decisions remain in the design.

### Some designs are needlessly elaborate

Lots of examples of over-design code:

+ YAGNI: one of the mantras of agile design. _You are not going to need it._
+ Microsoft resarchers report that a vanishingly small number of Microsoft
  Office apps use all its features. In fact, in the usual case, most users
  use just a tiny fraction of all the tools in Office.

### The Perfect is the Enemy of the Good

Sometimes, the perfect (design) is the enemy of the good (design):

+ Richard Gabriel: [_Worse is Better_](http://www.jwz.org/doc/worse-is-better.html).
  Bell Labs vs MIT-style design.
  The former was pragmatic, a huge messy play pen where everyone
  can muck in. The latter was perfection squared, a place where
  every idea has to be consistent and perfect. _It is better to drop those parts of the design that deal with less common circumstances than to introduce either implementational complexity or inconsistency._
+ Evidence: Bell Labs released UNIX while MIT-style designer Richard Stallman
  never could build up to a full UNIX distribution.

### Some Design Better than No Design

Sometimes, some design, working towards better design, is infinitely
better than no design:

+ George Box: _All models are wrong, but some are useful_.

### Design! Just Do It!

Imperfect designs are needed to get to good designs:

+ Donald Norman:
  [The Design of Everyday Things](http://goo.gl/iFWt4).
  _It takes N designs to get it right, most projects canceled after one bad design.)
+ [Donald Schon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donald_Sch%C3%B6n):
  reflective design,  "activity by which (people)
  take work itself as an object  of reflection". That is do a design
  then take a second, third, fourth look at it.
+ [Vilfredo Pareto](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vilfredo_Pareto):
  _Give me the fruitful error any time, full of
  seeds, bursting with its own corrections. You can
  keep your sterile truth for yourself."_ Model-based design.
  Build an executable version of "it"; <run "it" a lot using
  randomly chosen inputs. Summarize the results. Look for effects
  that matter a lot, matter rarely. Focus on what matters. Ignore the rest.

## Design = Experimentation

